docs/ahc-link.md, before:

# Using `ahc-link`

`ahc-link` is the frontend program of Asterius. It taks a Haskell `Main` module and optionally an ES6 "entry" module as input, then emits a `.wasm` WebAssembly binary module and companion JavaScript, which can be run in Node.js or browser environments.

The options are described in full details here.

## Basic input/output options

### `--input-hs ARG`

The Haskell `Main` module's file path. This option doesn't have a default and is mandatory; all others are optional.

### `--input-mjs ARG`

The ES6 "entry" module's file path. If not specified, the default entry module initializes an Asterius instance and calls `Main.main`, and upon normal completion, prints the standard output via `console.log`.

It's possible to override the default behavior by specifying your own entry module. First, you need two imports (the relevant files are auto-generated and don't exist yet):

```
import { module } from "./xx.wasm.mjs";
import { newInstance } from "./xx.lib.mjs";
```

Assuming `xx.hs` is the input Haskell `Main` module.

Now, `module` is a `Promise` which resolves to a `WebAssembly.Module`. It's stateless and supports structured cloning, so it's possible to reuse it by send it to `Worker`s, store it in IndexedDB, etc. To avoid unnecessary compilation when reusing it, you need the dynamic `import()` for `xx.wasm.mjs` instead.

`newInstance` is an async function which takes the `WebAssembly.Module` and resolves to an Asterius instance. An Asterius instance is a super-set of a `WebAssembly.Instance` and contains stateful fields to support running Haskell code. You can take a look at the manually written entry modules in `asterius/test` to get some idea on the capabilities of such an instance.

### `--output-directory ARG`

Specifies the output directory. Defaults to the same directory of `--input-hs`.

### `--output-prefix` ARG

Specifies the prefix of the output files. Defaults to the base filename of `--input-hs`, so for `xx.hs`, we generate `xx.wasm`, `xx.lib.mjs`, etc.

## Common options for controlling outputs

### `--ghc-option ARG`

Specify additional ghc options. The `{-# OPTIONS_GHC #-}` pragma also works.

### `--browser`

Indicates the output code is to be run in a browser environment. By default, the output code is intended to be run by Node.js instead.

### `--bundle`

Instead of copying the runtime `.mjs` modules to the target directory, generate a self-contained `xx.js` script, and running `xx.js` has the same effect as running the entry module. Only works for browser targets.

`--bundle` is supported by [`Parcel`](https://parceljs.org/) under the hood and performs minification on the bundled JavaScript file. It's likely beneficial since it reduces total size of scripts and doesn't require multiple requests for fetching them.

## `--no-streaming`

Do not use `WebAssembly.compileStreaming`/`WebAssembly.instantiateStreaming` in output code. This option only works with `--browser`; when the target is Node.js it's ignored.

## `--sync`

Use synchronous `WebAssembly.Module`/`WebAssembly.Instance` constructors in output code. Additionally,

* The `module` value exported by `xx.wasm.mjs` is no longer a `Promise`, but the `WebAssembly.Module` value itself.
* The `newInstance` function exported by `xx.lib.mjs` is no longer async, but returns the Asterius instance synchronously.

We don't recommend using `--sync` for most use cases (even for the Node.js target). It's intended for a special use case: Cloudflare Workers, where any initialization logic must be completed on the first run and can't be put in the event queue.

## More advanced options for hackers

### `--run`

Runs the output code using `node`. Ignored for browser targets.

### `--binaryen`

Use the binaryen backend for generating `.wasm` files. If you observe any different behavior of output code when this option is on, it's a bug!

### `--debug`

Switch on the debug mode. Emits a ton of event logs suitable for piping to `grep` (or just leave it on the screen in case you'd like some hypnosis)

### `--full-sym-table`

Contain the full symbol table into `xx.lib.mjs`. Automatically implied by `--debug`.

## Options affecting the linker

### `--export-function ARG`

Use this when you `foreign export javascript` anything. Otherwise the dead code elimination performed by the linker will surely exclude that code from the output WebAssembly module if it's not transitively used by `Main.main`!

### `--extra-root-symbol ARG`

Use this to specify a symbol to be added to the "root symbol set". Works similar to `--export-function`, but the argument is not a Haskell function name, but a symbol name directly.

## Additional outputs for the curious

### `--output-link-report`

Output a "link report" text file containing internal linker stats.

### `--output-graphviz`

Output a `.dot` GraphViz file containing a symbol dependency graph file.

### `--output-ir`

Output wasm IRs of compiled Haskell modules and the resulting module. The IRs aren't intended to be consumed by external tools like binaryen/wabt.

Commit message:

Add documentation about Cabal support

docs/ahc-link.md, after:

# Using `ahc-dist`/`ahc-link`

`ahc-link` is the frontend program of Asterius. It taks a Haskell `Main` module and optionally an ES6 "entry" module as input, then emits a `.wasm` WebAssembly binary module and companion JavaScript, which can be run in Node.js or browser environments.

`ahc-dist` works similarly, except it takes the "executable" file generated from `ahc` (either directly by calling `ahc`, or indirectly by using `cabal`) as input. Most command-line arguments are the same as `ahc-link`, except `ahc-link` takes `--input-hs`, while `ahc-dist` takes `--input-exe`.

The options are described in full details here.

## Basic input/output options

### `--input-hs ARG`

The Haskell `Main` module's file path. This option doesn't have a default and is mandatory; all others are optional. This works only for `ahc-link`.

### `--input-exe ARG`

The "executable" file path. This works only for `ahc-dist`, and is also mandatory.

### `--input-mjs ARG`

The ES6 "entry" module's file path. If not specified, the default entry module initializes an Asterius instance and calls `Main.main`, and upon normal completion, prints the standard output via `console.log`.

It's possible to override the default behavior by specifying your own entry module. First, you need two imports (the relevant files are auto-generated and don't exist yet):

```
import { module } from "./xx.wasm.mjs";
import { newInstance } from "./xx.lib.mjs";
```

Assuming `xx.hs` is the input Haskell `Main` module.

Now, `module` is a `Promise` which resolves to a `WebAssembly.Module`. It's stateless and supports structured cloning, so it's possible to reuse it by send it to `Worker`s, store it in IndexedDB, etc. To avoid unnecessary compilation when reusing it, you need the dynamic `import()` for `xx.wasm.mjs` instead.

`newInstance` is an async function which takes the `WebAssembly.Module` and resolves to an Asterius instance. An Asterius instance is a super-set of a `WebAssembly.Instance` and contains stateful fields to support running Haskell code. You can take a look at the manually written entry modules in `asterius/test` to get some idea on the capabilities of such an instance.

### `--output-directory ARG`

Specifies the output directory. Defaults to the same directory of `--input-hs`.

### `--output-prefix` ARG

Specifies the prefix of the output files. Defaults to the base filename of `--input-hs`, so for `xx.hs`, we generate `xx.wasm`, `xx.lib.mjs`, etc.

## Common options for controlling outputs

### `--ghc-option ARG`

Specify additional ghc options. The `{-# OPTIONS_GHC #-}` pragma also works.

### `--browser`

Indicates the output code is to be run in a browser environment. By default, the output code is intended to be run by Node.js instead.

### `--bundle`

Instead of copying the runtime `.mjs` modules to the target directory, generate a self-contained `xx.js` script, and running `xx.js` has the same effect as running the entry module. Only works for browser targets.

`--bundle` is supported by [`Parcel`](https://parceljs.org/) under the hood and performs minification on the bundled JavaScript file. It's likely beneficial since it reduces total size of scripts and doesn't require multiple requests for fetching them.

## `--no-streaming`

Do not use `WebAssembly.compileStreaming`/`WebAssembly.instantiateStreaming` in output code. This option only works with `--browser`; when the target is Node.js it's ignored.

## `--sync`

Use synchronous `WebAssembly.Module`/`WebAssembly.Instance` constructors in output code. Additionally,

* The `module` value exported by `xx.wasm.mjs` is no longer a `Promise`, but the `WebAssembly.Module` value itself.
* The `newInstance` function exported by `xx.lib.mjs` is no longer async, but returns the Asterius instance synchronously.

We don't recommend using `--sync` for most use cases (even for the Node.js target). It's intended for a special use case: Cloudflare Workers, where any initialization logic must be completed on the first run and can't be put in the event queue.

## More advanced options for hackers

### `--run`

Runs the output code using `node`. Ignored for browser targets.

### `--binaryen`

Use the binaryen backend for generating `.wasm` files. If you observe any different behavior of output code when this option is on, it's a bug!

### `--debug`

Switch on the debug mode. Emits a ton of event logs suitable for piping to `grep` (or just leave it on the screen in case you'd like some hypnosis)

### `--full-sym-table`

Contain the full symbol table into `xx.lib.mjs`. Automatically implied by `--debug`.

## Options affecting the linker

### `--export-function ARG`

Use this when you `foreign export javascript` anything. Otherwise the dead code elimination performed by the linker will surely exclude that code from the output WebAssembly module if it's not transitively used by `Main.main`!

### `--extra-root-symbol ARG`

Use this to specify a symbol to be added to the "root symbol set". Works similar to `--export-function`, but the argument is not a Haskell function name, but a symbol name directly.

## Additional outputs for the curious

### `--output-link-report`

Output a "link report" text file containing internal linker stats.

### `--output-graphviz`

Output a `.dot` GraphViz file containing a symbol dependency graph file.

### `--output-ir`

Output wasm IRs of compiled Haskell modules and the resulting module. The IRs aren't intended to be consumed by external tools like binaryen/wabt.
